# Minutes of IDEM Code Review 2024-01-15

Attendence: Nick Tierney (chair), Gerry Ryan, David Duncan, August Hao, Kate Senior, Saras Windecker

- Gerry Ryan generously let us review his [sdmtools](https://github.com/geryan/sdmtools) R package, which was built to help collect together some useful functions used in species distribution modelling (sdm).
- Goal of todays code review: improve usability and utility for others - how can I improve it for others to be able to pick up and play
- Process for copying a repository for review:
  - fork repo
  - import fork to rstudio via new proj > version control
  - run `goodpractice::gp()` to get fundamental checks on the package, checking for various fixable problems.
- review console output from `gp()`
  - consider shortening lines and adding url description, and adding tests
  - tidy description: `use_tidy_description()`
  - fix `1:length(n)` with `seq_len(length(n))`
  - (integer(0) - question from August on hold for later)
  - need to add `gtools` to imports with `usethis::use_package("gtools")`
  - import pipe operator - `usethis::use_pipe()`

- [13:39] Saras Windecker:
> another way to get gtools in the imports, would be to add the functions themselves in the documentation of each function. for ex, in import_rasts.R you use gtools::mixedsort and terra::rast. You can declare these in the documentation using 
```
@importFrom gtools mixedsort
@importFrom terra rasts
```
> which will add those to your imports documentation and also keep it explicit which functions you use where. 

Nick Tierney disagrees with this, preferring to use `pkg::fun` + `use_package("pkg")` approach for importing packages. There are a few reasons for this, discussed more here: https://r-pkgs.org/dependencies-in-practice.html#sec-dependencies-NAMESPACE-workflow. But briefly the primary use of `@importFrom pkg fun` is to import `fun` into the package NAMESPACE, so you don't need to do `pkg::fun` anywhere again. So this is required if you want to import an operator, like `%>%`. You need to use `@importFrom pkg fun` when re-exporting `fun` to the users of your package. See the R-pkgs link above for more information.

> [13:40] Saras Windecker
> and fwiw if this is a utilities package rather than something you want wider public uptake (and therefore would need to have compatibility with other R versions) you could just use base pipe |>
 
- When using base pipe, `|>`, you also need to make sure that your use of it is tied to at least R version 4.1.0. There are also other features of `|>`, where its behaviour changed in subsequent versions, e.g., placeholders `_` are only from R 4.3.0, and are classed as "experimental".
 
- Other points on package development / checking a package:
  - use `devtools::document()` after documenting a function to render documentation. So `?fun` will give you a helpfile for `fun`.
- re-run `goodpractice::gp()` to check changes made to code have satisfied it
- README should be a point to improve useability
    - examples of functions, e.g. github.com/njtierney/neato

- For `sdmtools`, perhaps include raster data to enable use of functions, e.g. R logo or IDEM logo.
- Try to structure the README around: why should i use it? how do i use it? how do i get it? See: https://r-pkgs.org/other-markdown.html#sec-readme for more details
- Other ideas in `sdmtools`: check / warn about projections? or enforce class?

# Next code review(s)
 
- Gerry update and then we have a go again with someone else reviewing
- August: future code review sesh is I would like to specifically go through an example of how we should write unit tests for a complicated package with internal and user facing functions, but happy to do this in like another few sessions time
- Tierney: Discuss use of `usethis::edit_r_profile()`
 
# resources

- ropensci packages development guide - guide for reviewers - https://devguide.ropensci.org/reviewerguide.html)
- R Packages book by Hadley and Jenny: https://r-pkgs.org/
